NSB Gaia DR3 starlight derived-product policy

Approval record

approved_for_production = false
reviewer = "Prior redistribution review retained; production approval withdrawn after the 2026-07-11 source-population and passband audit"
review_date_utc = "2026-07-11T00:00:00Z"
source_terms_checked = true
derived_product_redistribution_allowed = true
raw_gaia_data_redistribution_allowed = false
runtime_artifact_only = true

Scope

This policy applies only to the NSB Gaia DR3 XP-derived starlight runtime product generated by the maintainer release pipeline. The approved redistributable runtime product is the derived HEALPix starlight map CSV and its runtime TOML manifest after successful scientific validation, checksum pinning, and manifest registration.

This policy does not approve committing raw Gaia XP spectra, raw Gaia source-row dumps, Gaia DataLink response bodies, intermediate normalized XP chunks, or full Gaia release-input extracts to the NSB repository. Those files are release-build working data and must remain outside the repository unless a separate maintainer decision explicitly changes that rule.

Reviewed source basis

The Gaia DR3 documentation release 1.3 is published by the European Space Agency and the Gaia Data Processing and Analysis Consortium. It states that Gaia DR3 contains astrometry, broad-band photometry, mean BP/RP and RVS spectra for large source subsets, and other Gaia DR3 data products. It also states that Gaia DR3 data can be retrieved from the Gaia ESA Archive and that large data products, including spectra, are accessible through a DataLink service.

The same Gaia DR3 credit and citation instructions state that Gaia data are open and free to use, provided credit is given to ESA/Gaia/DPAC. NSB will preserve that credit in documentation, release notes, and runtime provenance for the derived starlight product.

Required acknowledgement

Every release note, documentation page, or paper describing a production Gaia-derived NSB starlight map must include the following acknowledgement or an equivalent acknowledgement required by the Gaia DR3 documentation:

This work has made use of data from the European Space Agency mission Gaia, processed by the Gaia Data Processing and Analysis Consortium. Funding for the DPAC has been provided by national institutions, in particular the institutions participating in the Gaia Multilateral Agreement.

Required citations

Scientific documentation for a production Gaia-derived NSB starlight map must cite the Gaia mission paper and the Gaia DR3 release paper. It should also cite Gaia DR3 validation and BP/RP processing papers when discussing scientific validation, photometry, XP spectra, or limitations.

Attribution string for runtime provenance

source_catalogue_license = "Gaia DR3 data are open and free to use with credit to ESA/Gaia/DPAC; NSB redistributes only a derived validated runtime starlight map"

Approved source selection

The production release-input extraction is approved only for the documented Gaia DR3 XP source selection used by NSB:

- source catalogue: Gaia
- source catalogue release: DR3
- archive table: gaiadr3.gaia_source
- spectra source: official Gaia DR3 XP sampled bulk inventory, with Gaia DataLink used only for controlled validation or repair
- duplicate policy: every published source_id is represented once; duplicated_source is retained as a quality flag and is not an exclusion
- XP availability filter: has_xp_sampled = true
- required astrometric fields: source_id, ra, dec, ref_epoch
- required photometric source limit: effective Gaia DR3 XP sampled limit G <= 15
- expected published sampled population: 34,468,373 unique source_id values, reconciled against the official checksummed bulk inventory
- approved passband for the derived runtime product: 336-650 nm passband-integrated photon radiance
- completeness limitation: the sampled population is a magnitude-limited subset of the 219,197,643-source XP continuous population; missing-flux estimation is a separate production gate

Approved repository artifacts after validation

Only these derived runtime artifacts are approved for possible repository inclusion after successful production validation and size review:

The final filenames must encode `336_650nm` and the one canonical nside selected by a reviewed resolution study. Every candidate in that study must be generated independently from source-level Gaia contributions. No filename is approved before that review.

The release CSV and runtime manifest must be generated by repository Rust tools, checksum pinned, self-loaded by pack_starlight_asset --production through the runtime ValidatedStarlightMap admission path, and registered in crates/nsb/data/manifest.toml as runtime_embedded production assets.

Files excluded from repository inclusion

The following files must not be committed as part of this policy:

- raw Gaia XP spectra
- raw Gaia source-row dumps
- Gaia DataLink response bodies
- intermediate normalized XP chunk files
- full Gaia release-input extracts
- temporary curl output
- local cache files from Gaia TAP or DataLink retrieval

Production gates

The final production artifact may be bundled only when all of the following are true:

1. Gaia production diagnostics reconcile all 34,468,373 selected sampled sources with unique represented sources plus explicitly reviewed scientific exclusions, with zero missing products, duplicate IDs, parse failures, partial files, or unexpected rejections.
2. The canonical Gaia source CSV checksum is recorded.
3. The generated HEALPix map checksum is recorded.
4. The runtime manifest checksum is recorded.
5. Integrated photon-radiance flux conservation passes.
6. Finite and nonnegative integrated radiance validation passes.
7. Integrated plane/pole validation passes.
8. Integrated longitude seam and wrap validation passes.
9. Structured independent regional comparison passes using the reviewed validation reference file.
10. The production packer self-loads the emitted CSV and TOML through ValidatedStarlightMap.
11. The release checklist records the final artifact paths, checksums, commands, and validation report.
12. A reviewed 336-650 nm missing-flux report quantifies the XP continuous-only contribution globally and for plane/pole regions.
13. A resolution-selection study of independently generated source-level candidates has a reviewed recommendation, and the single published canonical nside matches it.

Decision

The redistribution conclusion remains that NSB may redistribute a derived Gaia DR3 XP starlight runtime map CSV and TOML manifest with the required credit. Production approval is currently false because the corrected 336-650 nm contract, complete sampled population, missing-flux evidence, and independent resolution-selection study have not yet completed review. NSB must not commit raw Gaia XP spectra, raw Gaia source-row dumps, Gaia DataLink responses, intermediate XP chunks, or full release-input extracts under this policy.
